For the past half year, the exiled king Viserys Targaryen and his thirteen year old sister, Princess Daenerys Targaryen, having been residing in the manse of Illyrio Mopatis, a Magister of the Free City of Pentos. Viserys wishes to win back his father's throne and is in need of an army, which he hopes to acquire by making a marriage alliance with a Dothraki khal who leads a large khalasar.
Viserys presents Daenerys with a gift from Magister Illyrio, a fine silk dress. Daenerys has to look like the princess she is, so Khal Drogo will ask for her hand in marriage. Although Daenerys is doubtful of Illyrio's motives, Viserys insists that the Magister simply wants to earn his good graces. Afraid of angering her brother (which he calls "waking the dragon"), Daenerys keeps silent about her mistrust. Viserys warns Daenerys not to fail him, and twists one of her niples to emphasize his threat. According to Viserys, when history of his reign is written, it will be said that his reign began that night.
Daenerys and Viserys Targaryen
Viserys departs, leaving Daenerys alone with her thoughts. She dreads the feast she has to attend that evening, and her mind wanders to Westeros, the homeland she has never seen. She had been conceived shortly before her mother, Queen Rhaella Targaryen, fled King's Landing with Viserys, and born nine months later on Dragonstone. Yet she knows the stories Viserys has told her, the flight from King's Landing to Dragonstone; Her eldest brother, Rhaegar Targaryen fighting Robert Baratheon and dying; The Sack of King’s Landing, the gruesome death of Prince Aegon Targaryen, and the murder of her father, King Aerys II Targaryen, in the throne room, committed by a knight of his own Kingsguard. Nine months after the deaths of her brother and father, Daenerys's mother died giving birth to her (something for which Viserys has never forgiven her), during a summer storm which destroyed most of the Targaryen fleet which had been Dragonstone's last defense. When the garrison of Dragonstone was wiling to give Viserys and Daenerys over to Stannis Baratheon, who was on his way to take Dragonstone, Ser Willem Darry and four loyal men secretly took them to Braavos. There they lived in a big house with a red door. However, Ser Willem died, leaving them without a guardian, and the servants stole what money was left. When Viserys and Daenerys were put out of the house not long afte, they began to travel from city to city, never staying anywhere long, as Viserys feared the Usurper's assassins. Daenerys recalls how rich merchants, archons and magisters became less and less willing to host the Targaryens as the years went by, and how Viserys had been forced to sell their mother's crown. However, despite the lack of support, Viserys has become obsessed with recovering the Iron Throne. Daenerys knows that he is being called "the Beggar King" behind his back, and wonders if people have given her a nickname too.
Illyrio's servants come to bathe Daenerys and prepare her for the feast given at the manse of Khal Drogo, where she is to meet and impress the Khal, so he will ask for her hand in marriage. The servants tell her how lucky she is to marry a man so rich that even his slaves wear golden collars. Once she is properly dressed, her brother returns with Magister Illyrio and commands her to stand up and turn around. Illyrio showers Daenerys with compliments while Viserys complains she is too skinny and too young. Illyrio reassures him that she is old enough for the khal and comments on her silver-gold hair and purple eyes, the hallmarks of old Valyrian nobility. When Viserys states that barbarians are said to have queer tastes such as boys and sheep, Illyrio warns him not to say these things to Khal Drogo, creating a flare of anger in Viserys’ eyes.
Viserys tells Dany to stop crying.
The three of them journey in Illyrio's litter to Khal Drogo's manse in the pitch dark. Viserys states that ten thousand Dothraki “screamers” will be enough to overthrow the usurper when combined with those in Westeros that are awaiting his return. He speculates on those who would join their cause: House Tyrell, House Redwyne, House Darry, House Greyjoy, and the Dornishmen. Illyrio assures Viserys that the people in the Seven Kingdoms secretly await his return, though Daenerys doubts him.
Illyrio says that Drogo’s mansion was a gift from the magisters of Pentos, to help win Drogo's friendship. They arrive at the mansion and are announced as King Viserys III and Princess Daenerys. Illyrio points out several prominent guests, including Ser Jorah Mormont, who had fled the Seven Kingdoms under sentence of death several years before, and has since spent much time among the Dothraki. Illyrio then points out Khal Drogo himself, who is as graceful as a panther, and younger than Daenerys had expected. Viserys notes his long braid, which means he has never been defeated in combat. Daenerys only notes his cold, hard face and is afraid of him. She asks to go home, provoking a rant from Viserys about how their home has been taken away from them. Daenerys only meant their rooms in Illyrio’s estate, but none of the places they have stayed in have been Viserys' home. Viserys also assures Daenerys that he would let Khal Drogo's whole khalasar, including their horses, rape her if it would win him back the Seven Kingdoms. He then tells her to stop crying, because Illyrio is leading Khal Drogo over to meet them. Daenerys stops crying, stands up straight, and smiles.
Eddard Stark had left before dawn, Septa Mordane informed Sansa as they broke their
fast. “The king sent for him. Another hunt, I do believe. There are still wild aurochs in
these lands, I am told.”
“I’ve never seen an aurochs,” Sansa said, feeding a piece of bacon to Lady under the
table. The direwolf took it from her hand, as delicate as a queen.
Septa Mordane sniffed in disapproval. “A noble lady does not feed dogs at her table,” she
said, breaking off another piece of comb and letting the honey drip down onto her bread.
“She’s not a dog, she’s a direwolf,” Sansa pointed out as Lady licked her fingers with a
rough tongue. “Anyway, Father said we could keep them with us if we want.”
The septa was not appeased. “You’re a good girl, Sansa, but I do vow, when it comes to
that creature you’re as willful as your sister Arya.” She scowled. “And where is Arya this
morning?”“She wasn’t hungry,” Sansa said, knowing full well that her sister had probably stolen
down to the kitchen hours ago and wheedled a breakfast out of some cook’s boy.
“Do remind her to dress nicely today. The grey velvet, perhaps. We are all invited to ride
with the queen and Princess Myrcella in the royal wheelhouse, and we must look our
best.”
Sansa already looked her best. She had brushed out her long auburn hair until it shone,
and picked her nicest blue silks. She had been looking forward to today for more than a
week. It was a great honor to ride with the queen, and besides, Prince Joffrey might be
there. Her betrothed. Just thinking it made her feel a strange fluttering inside, even
though they were not to marry for years and years. Sansa did not really know Joffrey yet,
but she was already in love with him. He was all she ever dreamt her prince should be,
tall and handsome and strong, with hair like gold. She treasured every chance to spend
time with him, few as they were. The only thing that scared her about today was Arya.
Arya had a way of ruining everything. You never knew what she would do. “I’ll tell her,”
Sansa said uncertainly, “but she’ll dress the way she always does.” She hoped it wouldn’t
be too embarrassing. “May I be excused?”
“You may.” Septa Mordane helped herself to more bread and honey, and Sansa slid from
the bench. Lady followed at her heels as she ran from the inn’s common room.
Outside, she stood for a moment amidst the shouts and curses and the creak of wooden
wheels as the men broke down the tents and pavilions and loaded the wagons for
another day’s march. The inn was a sprawling three-story structure of pale stone, the
biggest that Sansa had ever seen, but even so, it had accommodations for less than a
third of the king’s party, which had swollen to more than four hundred with the addition
of her father’s household and the freeriders who had joined them on the road.
She found Arya on the banks of the Trident, trying to hold Nymeria still while she
brushed dried mud from her fur. The direwolf was not enjoying the process. Arya was
wearing the same riding leathers she had worn yesterday and the day before.
“You better put on something pretty,” Sansa told her. “Septa Mordane said so. We’re
traveling in the queen’s wheelhouse with Princess Myrcella today.”
“I’m not,” Arya said, trying to brush a tangle out of Nymeria’s matted grey fur. “Mycah
and I are going to ride upstream and look for rubies at the ford.”
“Rubies,” Sansa said, lost. “What rubies?”
Arya gave her a look like she was so stupid. “Rhaegar’s rubies. This is where King Robert
killed him and won the crown.”
Sansa regarded her scrawny little sister in disbelief. “You can’t look for rubies, the
princess is expecting us. The queen invited us both.”
“I don’t care,” Arya said. “The wheelhouse doesn’t even have windows, you can’t see a
thing.”
“What could you want to see?” Sansa said, annoyed. She had been thrilled by the
invitation, and her stupid sister was going to ruin everything, just as she’d feared. “It’s
all just fields and farms and holdfasts.”
“It is not,” Arya said stubbornly. “If you came with us sometimes, you’d see.”
“I hate riding,” Sansa said fervently. “All it does is get you soiled and dusty and sore.”
Arya shrugged. “Hold still,” she snapped at Nymeria, “I’m not hurting you.” Then to
Sansa she said, “When we were crossing the Neck, I counted thirty-six flowers I never 
saw before, and Mycah showed me a lizard-lion.”
Sansa shuddered. They had been twelve days crossing the Neck, rumbling down a
crooked causeway through an endless black bog, and she had hated every moment of it.
The air had been damp and clammy, the causeway so narrow they could not even make
proper camp at night, they had to stop right on the kingsroad. Dense thickets of halfdrowned
trees pressed close around them, branches dripping with curtains of pale
fungus. Huge flowers bloomed in the mud and floated on pools of stagnant water, but if
you were stupid enough to leave the causeway to pluck them, there were quicksands
waiting to suck you down, and snakes watching from the trees, and lizard-lions floating
half-submerged in the water, like black logs with eyes and teeth.
None of which stopped Arya, of course. One day she came back grinning her horsey grin,
her hair all tangled and her clothes covered in mud, clutching a raggedy bunch of purple
and green flowers for Father. Sansa kept hoping he would tell Arya to behave herself and
act like the highborn lady she was supposed to be, but he never did, he only hugged her
and thanked her for the flowers. That just made her worse.
Then it turned out the purple flowers were called poison kisses, and Arya got a rash on
her arms. Sansa would have thought that might have taught her a lesson, but Arya
laughed about it, and the next day she rubbed mud all over her arms like some ignorant
bog woman just because her friend Mycah told her it would stop the itching. She had
bruises on her arms and shoulders too, dark purple welts and faded green-and-yellow
splotches, Sansa had seen them when her sister undressed for sleep. How she had gotten
those only the seven gods knew.
Arya was still going on, brushing out Nymeria’s tangles and chattering about things
she’d seen on the trek south. “Last week we found this haunted watchtower, and the day
before we chased a herd of wild horses. You should have seen them run when they
caught a scent of Nymeria.” The wolf wriggled in her grasp and Arya scolded her. “Stop
that, I have to do the other side, you’re all muddy.”
“You’re not supposed to leave the column,” Sansa reminded her. “Father said so.”
Arya shrugged. “I didn’t go far. Anyway, Nymeria was with me the whole time. I don’t
always go off, either. Sometimes it’s fun just to ride along with the wagons and talk to
people.”
Sansa knew all about the sorts of people Arya liked to talk to: squires and grooms and
serving girls, old men and naked children, rough-spoken freeriders of uncertain birth.
Arya would make friends with anybody. This Mycah was the worst; a butcher’s boy,
thirteen and wild, he slept in the meat wagon and smelled of the slaughtering block. Just 
the sight of him was enough to make Sansa feel sick, but Arya seemed to prefer his
company to hers.
Sansa was running out of patience now. “You have to come with me,” she told her sister
firmly. “You can’t refuse the queen. Septa Mordane will expect you.”
Arya ignored her. She gave a hard yank with the brush. Nymeria growled and spun away,
affronted. “Come back here!”
“There’s going to be lemon cakes and tea,” Sansa went on, all adult and reasonable. Lady
brushed against her leg. Sansa scratched her ears the way she liked, and Lady sat beside
her on her haunches, watching Arya chase Nymeria. “Why would you want to ride a
smelly old horse and get all sore and sweaty when you could recline on feather pillows
and eat cakes with the queen?”
“I don’t like the queen,” Arya said casually. Sansa sucked in her breath, shocked that
even Arya would say such a thing, but her sister prattled on, heedless. “She won’t even
let me bring Nymeria.” She thrust the brush under her belt and stalked her wolf.
Nymeria watched her approach warily.
“A royal wheelhouse is no place for a wolf,” Sansa said. “And Princess Myrcella is afraid
of them, you know that.”
“Myrcella is a little baby.” Arya grabbed Nymeria around her neck, but the moment she
pulled out the brush again the direwolf wriggled free and bounded off. Frustrated, Arya
threw down the brush. “Bad wolf!” she shouted.
Sansa couldn’t help but smile a little. The kennelmaster once told her that an animal
takes after its master. She gave Lady a quick little hug. Lady licked her cheek. Sansa
giggled. Arya heard and whirled around, glaring. “I don’t care what you say, I’m going
out riding.” Her long horsey face got the stubborn look that meant she was going to do
something willful.
“Gods be true, Arya, sometimes you act like such a child,” Sansa said. “I’ll go by myself
then. It will be ever so much nicer that way. Lady and I will eat all the lemon cakes and
just have the best time without you.”
She turned to walk off, but Arya shouted after her, “They won’t let you bring Lady
either.” She was gone before Sansa could think of a reply, chasing Nymeria along the
river.
Alone and humiliated, Sansa took the long way back to the inn, where she knew Septa 
Mordane would be waiting. Lady padded quietly by her side. She was almost in tears. All
she wanted was for things to be nice and pretty, the way they were in the songs. Why
couldn’t Arya be sweet and delicate and kind, like Princess Myrcella? She would have
liked a sister like that.
Sansa could never understand how two sisters, born only two years apart, could be so
different. It would have been easier if Arya had been a bastard, like their half brother
Jon. She even looked like Jon, with the long face and brown hair of the Starks, and
nothing of their lady mother in her face or her coloring. And Jon’s mother had been
common, or so people whispered. Once, when she was littler, Sansa had even asked
Mother if perhaps there hadn’t been some mistake. Perhaps the grumkins had stolen her
real sister. But Mother had only laughed and said no, Arya was her daughter and Sansa’s
trueborn sister, blood of their blood. Sansa could not think why Mother would want to
lie about it, so she supposed it had to be true.
As she neared the center of camp, her distress was quickly forgotten. A crowd had
gathered around the queen’s wheelhouse. Sansa heard excited voices buzzing like a hive
of bees. The doors had been thrown open, she saw, and the queen stood at the top of the
wooden steps, smiling down at someone. She heard her saying, “The council does us
great honor, my good lords.”
“What’s happening?” she asked a squire she knew.
“The council sent riders from King’s Landing to escort us the rest of the way,” he told
her. “An honor guard for the king.”
Anxious to see, Sansa let Lady clear a path through the crowd. People moved aside
hastily for the direwolf. When she got closer, she saw two knights kneeling before the
queen, in armor so fine and gorgeous that it made her blink.
One knight wore an intricate suit of white enameled scales, brilliant as a field of newfallen
snow, with silver chasings and clasps that glittered in the sun. When he removed
his helm, Sansa saw that he was an old man with hair as pale as his armor, yet he
seemed strong and graceful for all that. From his shoulders hung the pure white cloak of
the Kingsguard.
His companion was a man near twenty whose armor was steel plate of a deep forestgreen.
He was the handsomest man Sansa had ever set eyes upon; tall and powerfully
made, with jet-black hair that fell to his shoulders and framed a clean-shaven face, and
laughing green eyes to match his armor. Cradled under one arm was an antlered helm,
its magnificent rack shimmering in gold.
At first Sansa did not notice the third stranger. He did not kneel with the others. He
stood to one side, beside their horses, a gaunt grim man who watched the proceedings in
silence. His face was pockmarked and beardless, with deepset eyes and hollow cheeks.
Though he was not an old man, only a few wisps of hair remained to him, sprouting
above his ears, but those he had grown long as a woman’s. His armor was iron-grey
chainmail over layers of boiled leather, plain and unadorned, and it spoke of age and
hard use. Above his right shoulder the stained leather hilt of the blade strapped to his
back was visible; a two-handed greatsword, too long to be worn at his side.
“The king is gone hunting, but I know he will be pleased to see you when he returns,” the
queen was saying to the two knights who knelt before her, but Sansa could not take her
eyes off the third man. He seemed to feel the weight of her gaze. Slowly he turned his
head. Lady growled. A terror as overwhelming as anything Sansa Stark had ever felt
filled her suddenly. She stepped backward and bumped into someone.
Strong hands grasped her by the shoulders, and for a moment Sansa thought it was her
father, but when she turned, it was the burned face of Sandor Clegane looking down at
her, his mouth twisted in a terrible mockery of a smile. “You are shaking, girl,” he said,
his voice rasping. “Do I frighten you so much?”
He did, and had since she had first laid eyes on the ruin that fire had made of his face,
though it seemed to her now that he was not half so terrifying as the other. Still, Sansa
wrenched away from him, and the Hound laughed, and Lady moved between them,
rumbling a warning. Sansa dropped to her knees to wrap her arms around the wolf. They
were all gathered around gaping, she could feel their eyes on her, and here and there she
heard muttered comments and titters of laughter.
“A wolf,” a man said, and someone else said, “Seven hells, that’s a direwolf,” and the first
man said, “What’s it doing in camp?” and the Hound’s rasping voice replied, “The Starks
use them for wet nurses,” and Sansa realized that the two stranger knights were looking
down on her and Lady, swords in their hands, and then she was frightened again, and
ashamed. Tears filled her eyes.
She heard the queen say, “Joffrey, go to her.”
And her prince was there.
“Leave her alone,” Joffrey said. He stood over her, beautiful in blue wool and black
leather, his golden curls shining in the sun like a crown. He gave her his hand, drew her
to her feet. “What is it, sweet lady? Why are you afraid? No one will hurt you. Put away
your swords, all of you. The wolf is her little pet, that’s all.” He looked at Sandor Clegane.
“And you, dog, away with you, you’re scaring my betrothed.”
The Hound, ever faithful, bowed and slid away quietly through the press. Sansa
struggled to steady herself. She felt like such a fool. She was a Stark of Winterfell, a
noble lady, and someday she would be a queen. “It was not him, my sweet prince,” she
tried to explain. “It was the other one.”
The two stranger knights exchanged a look. “Payne?” chuckled the young man in the
green armor.
The older man in white spoke to Sansa gently. “Ofttimes Ser Ilyn frightens me as well,
sweet lady. He has a fearsome aspect.”
“As well he should.” The queen had descended from the wheelhouse. The spectators
parted to make way for her. “If the wicked do not fear the Mng’s Justice, you have put
the wrong man in the office.”
Sansa finally found her words. “Then surely you have chosen the right one, Your Grace,”
she said, and a gale of laughter erupted all around her.
“Well spoken, child,” said the old man in white. “As befits the daughter of Eddard Stark.
I am honored to know you, however irregular the manner of our meeting. I am Ser
Barristan Selmy, of the Kingsguard.” He bowed.
Sansa knew the name, and now the courtesies that Septa Mordane had taught her over
the years came back to her. “The Lord Commander of the Kingsguard,” she said, “and
councillor to Robert our king and to Aerys Targaryen before him. The honor is mine,
good knight. Even in the far north, the singers praise the deeds of Barristan the Bold.”
The green knight laughed again. “Barristan the Old, you mean. Don’t flatter him too
sweetly, child, he thinks overmuch of himself already.” He smiled at her. “Now, wolf girl,
if you can put a name to me as well, then I must concede that you are truly our Hand’s
daughter.”
Joffrey stiffened beside her. “Have a care how you address my betrothed.”
“I can answer,” Sansa said quickly, to quell her prince’s anger. She smiled at the green
knight. “Your helmet bears golden antlers, my lord. The stag is the sigil of the royal
House. King Robert has two brothers. By your extreme youth, you can only be Renly
Baratheon, Lord of Storm’s End and councillor to the king, and so I name you.”
Ser Barristan chuckled. “By his extreme youth, he can only be a prancing jackanapes,
and so I name him.”
There was general laughter, led by Lord Renly himself. The tension of a few moments
ago was gone, and Sansa was beginning to feel comfortable . . . until Ser Ilyn Payne
shouldered two men aside, and stood before her, unsmiling. He did not say a word. Lady
bared her teeth and began to growl, a low rumble full of menace, but this time Sansa
silenced the wolf with a gentle hand to the head. “I am sorry if I offended you, Ser Ilyn,”
she said.
She waited for an answer, but none came. As the headsman looked at her, his pale
colorless eyes seemed to strip the clothes away from her, and then the skin, leaving her
soul naked before him. Still silent, he turned and walked away.
Sansa did not understand. She looked at her prince. “Did I say something wrong, Your
Grace? Why will he not speak to me?”
“Ser Ilyn has not been feeling talkative these past fourteen years,” Lord Renly
commented with a sly smile.
Joffrey gave his uncle a look of pure loathing, then took Sansa’s hands in his own. “Aerys
Targaryen had his tongue ripped out with hot pincers.”
“He speaks most eloquently with his sword, however,” the queen said, “and his devotion
to our realm is unquestioned.” Then she smiled graciously and said, “Sansa, the good
councillors and I must speak together until the king returns with your father. I fear we
shall have to postpone your day with Myrcella. Please give your sweet sister my
apologies. Joffrey, perhaps you would be so kind as to entertain our guest today.”
“It would be my pleasure, Mother,” Joffrey said very formally. He took her by the arm
and led her away from the wheelhouse, and Sansa’s spirits took flight. A whole day with
her prince! She gazed at Joffrey worshipfully. He was so gallant, she thought. The way he
had rescued her from Ser Ilyn and the Hound, why, it was almost like the songs, like the
time Serwyn of the Mirror Shield saved the Princess Daeryssa from the giants, or Prince
Aemon the Dragonknight championing Queen Naerys’s honor against evil Ser Morgil’s
slanders.
The touch of Joffrey’s hand on her sleeve made her heart beat faster. “What would you
like to do?”
Be with you, Sansa thought, but she said, “Whatever you’d like to do, my prince.”
Jofftey reflected a moment. “We could go riding.”
“Oh, I love riding,” Sansa said.
Joffrey glanced back at Lady, who was following at their heels. “Your wolf is liable to
frighten the horses, and my dog seems to frighten you. Let us leave them both behind
and set off on our own, what do you say?”
Sansa hesitated. “If you like,” she said uncertainly. “I suppose I could tie Lady up.” She
did not quite understand, though. “I didn’t know you had a dog . . . ”
Joffrey laughed. “He’s my mother’s dog, in truth. She has set him to guard me, and so he
does.”
“You mean the Hound,” she said. She wanted to hit herself for being so slow. Her prince
would never love her if she seemed stupid. “Is it safe to leave him behind?”
Prince Joffrey looked annoyed that she would even ask. “Have no fear, lady. I am almost
a man grown, and I don’t fight with wood like your brothers. All I need is this.” He drew
his sword and showed it to her; a longsword adroitly shrunken to suit a boy of twelve,
gleaming blue steel, castle-forged and double-edged, with a leather grip and a lion’shead
pommel in gold. Sansa exclaimed over it admiringly, and Joffrey looked pleased. “I
call it Lion’s Tooth,” he said.
And so they left her direwolf and his bodyguard behind them, while they ranged east
along the north bank of the Trident with no company save Lion’s Tooth.
It was a glorious day, a magical day. The air was warm and heavy with the scent of
flowers, and the woods here had a gentle beauty that Sansa had never seen in the north.
Prince Joffrey’s mount was a blood bay courser, swift as the wind, and he rode it with
reckless abandon, so fast that Sansa was hard-pressed to keep up on her mare. It was a
day for adventures. They explored the caves by the riverbank, and tracked a shadowcat
to its lair, and when they grew hungry, Joffrey found a holdfast by its smoke and told
them to fetch food and wine for their prince and his lady. They dined on trout fresh from
the river, and Sansa drank more wine than she had ever drunk before. “My father only
lets us have one cup, and only at feasts,” she confessed to her prince.
“My betrothed can drink as much as she wants,” Joffrey said, refilling her cup.
They went more slowly after they had eaten. Joffrey sang for her as they rode, his voice
high and sweet and pure. Sansa was a little dizzy from the wine. “Shouldn’t we be
starting back?” she asked.
“Soon,” Joffrey said. “The battleground is right up ahead, where the river bends. That 
was where my father killed Rhaegar Targaryen, you know. He smashed in his chest,
crunch, right through the armor.” Joffrey swung an imaginary warhammer to show her
how it was done. “Then my uncle Jaime killed old Aerys, and my father was king. What’s
that sound?”
Sansa heard it too, floating through the woods, a kind of wooden clattering, snack snack
snack. “I don’t know,” she said. It made her nervous, though. “Joffrey, let’s go back.”
“I want to see what it is.” Joffrey turned his horse in the direction of the sounds, and
Sansa had no choice but to follow. The noises grew louder and more distinct, the clack of
wood on wood, and as they grew closer they heard heavy breathing as well, and now and
then a grunt.
“Someone’s there,” Sansa said anxiously. She found herself thinking of Lady, wishing the
direwolf was with her.
“You’re safe with me.” Joffrey drew his Lion’s Tooth from its sheath. The sound of steel
on leather made her tremble. “This way,” he said, riding through a stand of trees.
Beyond, in a clearing overlooking the river, they came upon a boy and a girl playing at
knights. Their swords were wooden sticks, broom handles from the look of them, and
they were rushing across the grass, swinging at each other lustily. The boy was years
older, a head taller, and much stronger, and he was pressing the attack. The girl, a
scrawny thing in soiled leathers, was dodging and managing to get her stick in the way of
most of the boy’s blows, but not all. When she tried to lunge at him, he caught her stick
with his own, swept it aside, and slid his wood down hard on her fingers. She cried out
and lost her weapon.
Prince Joffrey laughed. The boy looked around, wide-eyed and startled, and dropped his
stick in the grass. The girl glared at them, sucking on her knuckles to take the sting out,
and Sansa was horrified. “Arya?” she called out incredulously.
“Go away,” Arya shouted back at them, angry tears in her eyes. “What are you doing
here? Leave us alone.”
Joffrey glanced from Arya to Sansa and back again. “Your sister?” She nodded, blushing.
Joffrey examined the boy, an ungainly lad with a coarse, freckled face and thick red hair.
“And who are you, boy?” he asked in a commanding tone that took no notice of the fact
that the other was a year his senior.
“Mycah,” the boy muttered. He recognized the prince and averted his eyes. “M’lord.”
“He’s the butcher’s boy,” Sansa said.
“He’s my friend,” Arya said sharply. “You leave him alone.”
“A butcher’s boy who wants to be a knight, is it?” Joffrey swung down from his mount,
sword in hand. “Pick up your sword, butcher’s boy,” he said, his eyes bright with
amusement. “Let us see how good you are.”
Mycah stood there, frozen with fear.
Joffrey walked toward him. “Go on, pick it up. Or do you only fight little girls?”
“She ast me to, m’lord,” Mycah said. “She ast me to.”
Sansa had only to glance at Arya and see the flush on her sister’s face to know the boy
was telling the truth, but Joffrey was in no mood to listen. The wine had made him wild.
“Are you going to pick up your sword?”
Mycah shook his head. “It’s only a stick, m’lord. It’s not no sword, it’s only a stick.”
“And you’re only a butcher’s boy, and no knight.” Joffrey lifted Lion’s Tooth and laid its
point on Mycah’s cheek below the eye, as the butcher’s boy stood trembling. “That was
my lady’s sister you were hitting, do you know that?” A bright bud of blood blossomed
where his sword pressed into Mycah’s flesh, and a slow red line trickled down the boy’s
cheek.
“Stop it!” Arya screamed. She grabbed up her fallen stick.
Sansa was afraid. “Arya, you stay out of this.”
“I won’t hurt him . . . much,” Prince Joffrey told Arya, never taking his eyes off the
butcher’s boy.
Arya went for him.
Sansa slid off her mare, but she was too slow. Arya swung with both hands. There was a
loud crack as the wood split against the back of the prince’s head, and then everything
happened at once before Sansa’s horrified eyes. Joffrey staggered and whirled around,
roaring curses. Mycah ran for the trees as fast as his legs would take him. Arya swung at
the prince again, but this time Joffrey caught the blow on Lion’s Tooth and sent her
broken stick flying from her hands. The back of his head was all bloody and his eyes 
were on fire. Sansa was shrieking, “No, no, stop it, stop it, both of you, you’re spoiling it,”
but no one was listening. Arya scooped up a rock and hurled it at Joffrey’s head. She hit
his horse instead, and the blood bay reared and went galloping off after Mycah. “Stop it,
don’t, stop it!” Sansa screamed. Joffrey slashed at Arya with his sword, screaming
obscenities, terrible words, filthy words. Arya darted back, frightened now, but Joffrey
followed, hounding her toward the woods, backing her up against a tree. Sansa didn’t
know what to do. She watched helplessly, almost blind from her tears.
Then a grey blur flashed past her, and suddenly Nymeria was there, leaping, jaws closing
around Joffrey’s sword arm. The steel fell from his fingers as the wolf knocked him off
his feet, and they rolled in the grass, the wolf snarling and ripping at him, the prince
shrieking in pain. “Get it off,” he screamed. “Get it off!”
Arya’s voice cracked like a whip. “Nymeria!”
The direwolf let go of Joffrey and moved to Arya’s side. The prince lay in the grass,
whimpering, cradling his mangled arm. His shirt was soaked in blood. Arya said, “She
didn’t hurt you . . . much.” She picked up Lion’s Tooth where it had fallen, and stood
over him, holding the sword with both hands.
Jofftey made a scared whimpery sound as he looked up at her. “No,” he said, “don’t hurt
me. I’ll tell my mother.”
“You leave him alone!” Sansa screamed at her sister.
Arya whirled and heaved the sword into the air, putting her whole body into the throw.
The blue steel flashed in the sun as the sword spun out over the river. It hit the water
and vanished with a splash. Joffrey moaned. Arya ran off to her horse, Nymeria loping at
her heels.
After they had gone, Sansa went to Prince Joffrey. His eyes were closed in pain, his
breath ragged. Sansa knelt beside him. “Joffrey,” she sobbed. “Oh, look what they did,
look what they did. My poor prince. Don’t be afraid. I’ll ride to the holdfast and bring
help for you.” Tenderly she reached out and brushed back his soft blond hair.
His eyes snapped open and looked at her, and there was nothing but loathing there,
nothing but the vilest contempt. “Then go,” he spit at her. “And don’t touch me.”They’ve found her, my lord.”
Ned rose quickly. “Our men or Lannister’s?”
“It was Jory,” his steward Vayon Poole replied. “She’s not been harmed.”
“Thank the gods,” Ned said. His men had been searching for Arya for four days now, but
the queen’s men had been out hunting as well. “Where is she? Tell Jory to bring her here
at once.”
“I am sorry, my lord,” Poole told him. “The guards on the gate were Lannister men, and
they informed the queen when Jory brought her in. She’s being taken directly before the
king . . . ”
“Damn that woman!” Ned said, striding to the door. “Find Sansa and bring her to the
audience chamber. Her voice may be needed.” He descended the tower steps in a red
rage. He had led searches himself for the first three days, and had scarcely slept an hour
since Arya had disappeared. This morning he had been so heartsick and weary he could
scarcely stand, but now his fury was on him, filling him with strength.
Men called out to him as he crossed the castle yard, but Ned ignored them in his haste.
He would have run, but he was still the King’s Hand, and a Hand must keep his dignity.
He was aware of the eyes that followed him, of the muttered voices wondering what he
would do.
The castle was a modest holding a half day’s ride south of the Trident. The royal party
had made themselves the uninvited guests of its lord, Ser Raymun Darry, while the hunt
for Arya and the butcher’s boy was conducted on both sides of the river. They were not
welcome visitors. Ser Raymun lived under the king’s peace, but his family had fought
beneath Rhaegar’s dragon banners at the Trident, and his three older brothers had died
there, a truth neither Robert nor Ser Raymun had forgotten. With king’s men, Darry
men, Lannister men, and Stark men all crammed into a castle far too small for them,
tensions burned hot and heavy.
The king had appropriated Ser Raymun’s audience chamber, and that was where Ned 
found them. The room was crowded when he burst in. Too crowded, he thought; left
alone, he and Robert might have been able to settle the matter amicably.
Robert was slumped in Darry’s high seat at the far end of the room, his face closed and
sullen. Cersei Lannister and her son stood beside him. The queen had her hand on
Joffrey’s shoulder. Thick silken bandages still covered the boy’s arm.
Arya stood in the center of the room, alone but for Jory Cassel, every eye upon her.
“Arya,” Ned called loudly. He went to her, his boots ringing on the stone floor. When she
saw him, she cried out and began to sob.
Ned went to one knee and took her in his arms. She was shaking. “I’m sorry,” she
sobbed, “I’m sorry, I’m sorry.”
“I know,” he said. She felt so tiny in his arms, nothing but a scrawny little girl. It was
hard to see how she had caused so much trouble. “Are you hurt?”
“No.” Her face was dirty, and her tears left pink tracks down her cheeks. “Hungry some.
I ate some berries, but there was nothing else.”
“We’ll feed you soon enough,” Ned promised. He rose to face the king. “What is the
meaning of this?” His eyes swept the room, searching for friendly faces. But for his own
men, they were few enough. Ser Raymun Darry guarded his look well. Lord Renly wore a
half smile that might mean anything, and old Ser Barristan was grave; the rest were
Lannister men, and hostile. Their only good fortune was that both Jaime Lannister and
Sandor Clegane were missing, leading searches north of the Trident. “Why was I not told
that my daughter had been found?” Ned demanded, his voice ringing. “Why was she not
brought to me at once?”
He spoke to Robert, but it was Cersei Lannister who answered. “How dare you speak to
your king in that manner!”
At that, the king stirred. “Quiet, woman,” he snapped. He straightened in his seat. “I am
sorry, Ned. I never meant to frighten the girl. It seemed best to bring her here and get
the business done with quickly.”
“And what business is that?” Ned put ice in his voice.
The queen stepped forward. “You know full well, Stark. This girl of yours attacked my
son. Her and her butcher’s boy. That animal of hers tried to tear his arm off.”
“That’s not true,” Arya said loudly. “She just bit him a little. He was hurting Mycah.”
“Joff told us what happened,” the queen said. “You and the butcher boy beat him with
clubs while you set your wolf on him.”
“That’s not how it was,” Arya said, close to tears again. Ned put a hand on her shoulder.
“Yes it is!” Prince Joffrey insisted. “They all attacked me, and she threw Lion’s Tooth in
the river!” Ned noticed that he did not so much as glance at Arya as he spoke.
“Liar!” Arya yelled.
“Shut up!” the prince yelled back.
“Enough!” the king roared, rising from his seat, his voice thick with irritation. Silence
fell. He glowered at Arya through his thick beard. “Now, child, you will tell me what
happened. Tell it all, and tell it true. It is a great crime to lie to a king.” Then he looked
over at his son. “When she is done, you will have your turn. Until then, hold your
tongue.”
As Arya began her story, Ned heard the door open behind him. He glanced back and saw
Vayon Poole enter with Sansa. They stood quietly at the back of the hall as Arya spoke.
When she got to the part where she threw Joffrey’s sword into the middle of the Trident,
Renly Baratheon began to laugh. The king bristled. “Ser Barristan, escort my brother
from the hall before he chokes.”
Lord Renly stifled his laughter. “My brother is too kind. I can find the door myself.” He
bowed to Joffrey. “Perchance later you’ll tell me how a nine-year-old girl the size of a wet
rat managed to disarm you with a broom handle and throw your sword in the river.” As
the door swung shut behind him, Ned heard him say, “Lion’s Tooth,” and guffaw once
more.
Prince Joffrey was pale as he began his very different version of events. When his son
was done talking, the king rose heavily from his seat, looking like a man who wanted to
be anywhere but here. “What in all the seven hells am I supposed to make of this? He
says one thing, she says another.”
“They were not the only ones present,” Ned said. “Sansa, come here.” Ned had heard her
version of the story the night Arya had vanished. He knew the truth. “Tell us what
happened.”
His eldest daughter stepped forward hesitantly. She was dressed in blue velvets trimmed
with white, a silver chain around her neck. Her thick auburn hair had been brushed until 
it shone. She blinked at her sister, then at the young prince. “I don’t know,” she said
tearfully, looking as though she wanted to bolt. “I don’t remember. Everything happened
so fast, I didn’t see . . . ”
“You rotten!” Arya shrieked. She flew at her sister like an arrow, knocking Sansa down to
the ground, pummeling her. “Liar, liar, liar, liar.”
“Arya, stop it!” Ned shouted. Jory pulled her off her sister, kicking. Sansa was pale and
shaking as Ned lifted her back to her feet. “Are you hurt?” he asked, but she was staring
at Arya, and she did not seem to hear.
“The girl is as wild as that filthy animal of hers,” Cersei Lannister said. “Robert, I want
her punished.”
“Seven hells,” Robert swore. “Cersei, look at her. She’s a child. What would you have me
do, whip her through the streets? Damn it, children fight. It’s over. No lasting harm was
done.”
The queen was furious. “Joff will carry those scars for the rest of his life.”
Robert Baratheon looked at his eldest son. “So he will. Perhaps they will teach him a
lesson. Ned, see that your daughter is disciplined. I will do the same with my son.”
“Gladly, Your Grace,” Ned said with vast relief.
Robert started to walk away, but the queen was not done. “And what of the direwolf?”
she called after him. “What of the beast that savaged your son?”
The king stopped, turned back, frowned. “I’d forgotten about the damned wolf.”
Ned could see Arya tense in Jory’s arms. Jory spoke up quickly. “We found no trace of
the direwolf, Your Grace.”
Robert did not look unhappy. “No? So be it.”
The queen raised her voice. “A hundred golden dragons to the man who brings me its
skin!”
“A costly pelt,” Robert grumbled. “I want no part of this, woman. You can damn well buy
your furs with Lannister gold.”
The queen regarded him coolly. “I had not thought you so niggardly. The king I’d
thought to wed would have laid a wolfskin across my bed before the sun went down.”
Robert’s face darkened with anger. “That would be a fine trick, without a wolf.”
“We have a wolf,” Cersei Lannister said. Her voice was very quiet, but her green eyes
shone with triumph.
It took them all a moment to comprehend her words, but when they did, the king
shrugged irritably. “As you will. Have Ser Ilyn see to it.”
“Robert, you cannot mean this,” Ned protested.
The king was in no mood for more argument. “Enough, Ned, I will hear no more. A
direwolf is a savage beast. Sooner or later it would have turned on your girl the same way
the other did on my son. Get her a dog, she’ll be happier for it.”
That was when Sansa finally seemed to comprehend. Her eyes were frightened as they
went to her father. “He doesn’t mean Lady, does he?” She saw the truth on his face.
“No,” she said. “No, not Lady, Lady didn’t bite anybody, she’s good . . . ”
“Lady wasn’t there,” Arya shouted angrily. “You leave her alone!”
“Stop them,” Sansa pleaded, “don’t let them do it, please, please, it wasn’t Lady, it was
Nymeria, Arya did it, you can’t, it wasn’t Lady, don’t let them hurt Lady, I’ll make her be
good, I promise, I promise . . . ” She started to cry.
All Ned could do was take her in his arms and hold her while she wept. He looked across
the room at Robert. His old friend, closer than any brother. “Please, Robert. For the love
you bear me. For the love you bore my sister. Please.”
The king looked at them for a long moment, then turned his eyes on his wife. “Damn
you, Cersei,” he said with loathing.
Ned stood, gently disengaging himself from Sansa’s grasp. All the weariness of the past
four days had returned to him. “Do it yourself then, Robert,” he said in a voice cold and
sharp as steel. “At least have the courage to do it yourself.”
Robert looked at Ned with flat, dead eyes and left without a word, his footsteps heavy as
lead. Silence filled the hall.
“Where is the direwolf?” Cersei Lannister asked when her husband was gone. Beside her,
Prince Joffrey was smiling.
“The beast is chained up outside the gatehouse, Your Grace,” Ser Barristan Selmy
answered reluctantly.
“Send for Ilyn Payne.”
“No,” Ned said. “Jory, take the girls back to their rooms and bring me Ice.” The words
tasted of bile in his throat, but he forced them out. “If it must be done, I will do it.”
Cersei Lannister regarded him suspiciously. “You, Stark? Is this some trick? Why would
you do such a thing?”
They were all staring at him, but it was Sansa’s look that cut. “She is of the north. She
deserves better than a butcher.”
He left the room with his eyes burning and his daughter’s wails echoing in his ears, and
found the direwolf pup where they chained her. Ned sat beside her for a while. “Lady,”
he said, tasting the name. He had never paid much attention to the names the children
had picked, but looking at her now, he knew that Sansa had chosen well. She was the
smallest of the litter, the prettiest, the most gentle and trusting. She looked at him with
bright golden eyes, and he ruffled her thick grey fur.
Shortly, Jory brought him Ice.
When it was over, he said, “Choose four men and have them take the body north. Bury
her at Winterfell.”
“All that way?” Jory said, astonished.
“All that way,” Ned affirmed. “The Lannister woman shall never have this skin.”
He was walking back to the tower to give himself up to sleep at last when Sandor
Clegane and his riders came pounding through the castle gate, back from their hunt.
There was something slung over the back of his destrier, a heavy shape wrapped in a
bloody cloak. “No sign of your daughter, Hand,” the Hound rasped down, “but the day
was not wholly wasted. We got her little pet.” He reached back and shoved the burden
off, and it fell with a thump in front of Ned.
Bending, Ned pulled back the cloak, dreading the words he would have to find for Arya,
but it was not Nymeria after all. It was the butcher’s boy, Mycah, his body covered in
dried blood. He had been cut almost in half from shoulder to waist by some terrible blow
struck from above.
“You rode him down,” Ned said.
The Hound’s eyes seemed to glitter through the steel of that hideous dog’s-head helm.
“He ran.” He looked at Ned’s face and laughed. “But not very fast.” It seemed as though he had been falling for years.
Fly, a voice whispered in the darkness, but Bran did not know how to fly, so all he could
do was fall.
Maester Luwin made a little boy of clay, baked him till he was hard and brittle, dressed
him in Bran’s clothes, and flung him off a roof. Bran remembered the way he shattered.
“But I never fall,” he said, falling.
The ground was so far below him he could barely make it out through the grey mists that
whirled around him, but he could feel how fast he was falling, and he knew what was
waiting for him down there. Even in dreams, you could not fall forever. He would wake
up in the instant before he hit the ground, he knew. You always woke up in the instant
before you hit the ground.
And if you don’t? the voice asked.
The ground was closer now, still far far away, a thousand miles away, but closer than it
had been. It was cold here in the darkness. There was no sun, no stars, only the ground
below coming up to smash him, and the grey mists, and the whispering voice. He wanted
to cry.
Not cry. Fly.
“I can’t fly,” Bran said. “I can’t, I can’t . . . ”
How do you know? Have you ever tried?
The voice was high and thin. Bran looked around to see where it was coming from. A
crow was spiraling down with him, just out of reach, following him as he fell. “Help me,”
he said.
I’m trying, the crow replied. Say, got any corn?
Bran reached into his pocket as the darkness spun dizzily around him. When he pulled
his hand out, golden kernels slid from between his fingers into the air. They fell with him.
The crow landed on his hand and began to eat.
“Are you really a crow?” Bran asked.
Are you really falling? the crow asked back.
“It’s just a dream,” Bran said.
Is it? asked the crow.
“I’ll wake up when I hit the ground,” Bran told the bird.
You’ll die when you hit the ground, the crow said. It went back to eating corn.
Bran looked down. He could see mountains now, their peaks white with snow, and the
silver thread of rivers in dark woods. He closed his eyes and began to cry.
That won’t do any good, the crow said. I told you, the answer is flying, not crying. How
hard can it be? I’m doing it. The crow took to the air and flapped around Bran’s hand.
“You have wings,” Bran pointed out.
Maybe you do too.
Bran felt along his shoulders, groping for feathers.
There are different kinds of wings, the crow said.
Bran was staring at his arms, his legs. He was so skinny, just skin stretched taut over
bones. Had he always been so thin? He tried to remember. A face swam up at him out of
the grey mist, shining with light, golden. “The things I do for love,” it said.
Bran screamed.
The crow took to the air, cawing. Not that, it shrieked at him. Forget that, you do not
need it now, put it aside, put it away. It landed on Bran’s shoulder, and pecked at him,
and the shining golden face was gone.
Bran was falling faster than ever. The grey mists howled around him as he plunged
toward the earth below. “What are you doing to me?” he asked the crow, tearful.
Teaching you how to fly.
“I can’t fly!”
You’re flying tight now.
“I’m falling!”
Every flight begins with a fall, the crow said. Look down.
“I’m afraid . . . ”
LOOK DOWN!
Bran looked down, and felt his insides turn to water. The ground was rushing up at him
now. The whole world was spread out below him, a tapestry of white and brown and
green. He could see everything so clearly that for a moment he forgot to be afraid. He
could see the whole realm, and everyone in it.
He saw Winterfell as the eagles see it, the tall towers looking squat and stubby from
above, the castle walls just lines in the dirt. He saw Maester Luwin on his balcony,
studying the sky through a polished bronze tube and frowning as he made notes in a
book. He saw his brother Robb, taller and stronger than he remembered him, practicing
swordplay in the yard with real steel in his hand. He saw Hodor, the simple giant from
the stables, carrying an anvil to Mikken’s forge, hefting it onto his shoulder as easily as
another man might heft a bale of hay. At the heart of the godswood, the great white
weirwood brooded over its reflection in the black pool, its leaves rustling in a chill wind.
When it felt Bran watching, it lifted its eyes from the still waters and stared back at him
knowingly.
He looked east, and saw a galley racing across the waters of the Bite. He saw his mother
sitting alone in a cabin, looking at a bloodstained knife on a table in front of her, as the
rowers pulled at their oars and Ser Rodrik leaned across a rail, shaking and heaving. A
storm was gathering ahead of them, a vast dark roaring lashed by lightning, but
somehow they could not see it.
He looked south, and saw the great blue-green rush of the Trident. He saw his father
pleading with the king, his face etched with grief. He saw Sansa crying herself to sleep at
night, and he saw Arya watching in silence and holding her secrets hard in her heart. 
There were shadows all around them. One shadow was dark as ash, with the terrible face
of a hound. Another was armored like the sun, golden and beautiful. Over them both
loomed a giant in armor made of stone, but when he opened his visor, there was nothing
inside but darkness and thick black blood.
He lifted his eyes and saw clear across the narrow sea, to the Free Cities and the green
Dothraki sea and beyond, to Vaes Dothrak under its mountain, to the fabled lands of the
Jade Sea, to Asshai by the Shadow, where dragons stirred beneath the sunrise.
Finally he looked north. He saw the Wall shining like blue crystal, and his bastard
brother Jon sleeping alone in a cold bed, his skin growing pale and hard as the memory
of all warmth fled from him. And he looked past the Wall, past endless forests cloaked in
snow, past the frozen shore and the great blue-white rivers of ice and the dead plains
where nothing grew or lived. North and north and north he looked, to the curtain of light
at the end of the world, and then beyond that curtain. He looked deep into the heart of
winter, and then he cried out, afraid, and the heat of his tears burned on his cheeks.
Now you know, the crow whispered as it sat on his shoulder. Now you know why you
must live.
“Why?” Bran said, not understanding, falling, falling.
Because winter is coming.
Bran looked at the crow on his shoulder, and the crow looked back. It had three eyes,
and the third eye was full of a terrible knowledge. Bran looked down. There was nothing
below him now but snow and cold and death, a frozen wasteland where jagged bluewhite
spires of ice waited to embrace him. They flew up at him like spears. He saw the
bones of a thousand other dreamers impaled upon their points. He was desperately
afraid.
“Can a man still be brave if he’s afraid?” he heard his own voice saying, small and far
away.
And his father’s voice replied to him. “That is the only time a man can be brave.”
Now, Bran, the crow urged. Choose. Fly or die.
Death reached for him, screaming.
Bran spread his arms and flew.
Wings unseen drank the wind and filled and pulled him upward. The terrible needles of
ice receded below him. The sky opened up above. Bran soared. It was better than
climbing. It was better than anything. The world grew small beneath him.
“I’m flying!” he cried out in delight.
I’ve noticed, said the three-eyed crow. It took to the air, flapping its wings in his face,
slowing him, blinding him. He faltered in the air as its pinions beat against his cheeks.
Its beak stabbed at him fiercely, and Bran felt a sudden blinding pain in the middle of
his forehead, between his eyes.
“What are you doing?” he shrieked.
The crow opened its beak and cawed at him, a shrill scream of fear, and the grey mists
shuddered and swirled around him and ripped away like a veil, and he saw that the crow
was really a woman, a serving woman with long black hair, and he knew her from
somewhere, from Winterfell, yes, that was it, he remembered her now, and then he
realized that he was in Winterfell, in a bed high in some chilly tower room, and the blackhaired
woman dropped a basin of water to shatter on the floor and ran down the steps,
shouting, “He’s awake, he’s awake, he’s awake.”
Bran touched his forehead, between his eyes. The place where the crow had pecked him
was still burning, but there was nothing there, no blood, no wound. He felt weak and
dizzy. He tried to get out of bed, but nothing happened.
And then there was movement beside the bed, and something landed lightly on his legs.
He felt nothing. A pair of yellow eyes looked into his own, shining like the sun. The
window was open and it was cold in the room, but the warmth that came off the wolf
enfolded him like a hot bath. His pup, Bran realized . . . or was it? He was so big now. He
reached out to pet him, his hand trembling like a leaf.
When his brother Robb burst into the room, breathless from his dash up the tower steps,
the direwolf was licking Bran’s face. Bran looked up calmly. “His name is Summer,” he
said.
1. Apple Pie 

3 pounds mixed apples (such as Granny Smith, Gala and McIntosh)
2/3 cup granulated sugar
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
6 tablespoons unsalted butter
1 tablespoon all-purpose flour, plus more for dusting
3/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon
1/8 teaspoon salt
2 disks dough for Basic Crust 
1 large egg, beaten
Coarse sugar, for sprinkling

Peel and core the apples; slice 1/4 inch thick. Toss with the granulated sugar and lemon juice. Heat 4 tablespoons butter in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Add the apples and cook, stirring, until tender, about 10 minutes. Stir in the flour, cinnamon and salt; cook until thickened, 1 more minute. Let cool.

Roll out 1 disk of dough into a 12-inch round on a floured surface; ease into a 9-inch pie plate. Add the apples, mounding them slightly in the center, and dot with the remaining 2 tablespoons butter. Roll out the remaining dough into a 12-inch round. Lay it over the filling; press the edges of the crusts together, then fold the overhang under itself and crimp to seal. Brush with the beaten egg and sprinkle with coarse sugar. Cut a few slits in the top crust. Chill 1 hour.

Place a baking sheet on the lowest oven rack and preheat to 425 degrees F for 30 minutes. Place the pie on the hot baking sheet; lower the temperature to 375 degrees F. Bake until golden, 1 hour to 1 hour, 10 minutes. (Cover the edges with foil if they brown too quickly.) Cool on a rack.

Yield: one 9-inch pie


Antonis Achilleos

2. Apple-Berry Make Apple Pie, adding 1 extra tablespoon flour and 1 teaspoon vanilla to the filling. Off the heat, stir in 1 cup mixed berries. Top with a lattice crust, brush with a beaten egg and sprinkle with coarse sugar.

3. Apple-Cheddar Make Apple Pie, adding 2/3 cup diced sharp cheddar to the cooled filling before baking.

4. Tart Apple Make Apple Pie with very thinly sliced Granny Smith apples; toss with apple cider instead of lemon juice. Don't cook the filling. Omit the 4 tablespoons butter; toss with 2 extra tablespoons flour, the cinnamon, salt and 1/2 teaspoon nutmeg.

Antonis Achilleos

5. Apple Crumble Make Apple Pie, adding 1 extra tablespoon flour to the filling. Off the heat, add 1/2 cup sour cream and 1/2 teaspoon nutmeg. Omit the top crust. Mix 1/2 cup flour, 1 cup oats, 3/4 cup each chopped walnuts and brown sugar, 6 tablespoons melted butter and a pinch of salt. Drop in clumps over the filling.

6. Apple Strudel Make Apple Pie with grated peeled Golden Delicious apples. Don't cook the filling. Omit the 4 tablespoons butter; toss the apples with the cinnamon, salt, 2 extra tablespoons flour and 1/2 cup raisins. Dot with 1 extra tablespoon butter.

Antonis Achilleos

7. Apple-Pear-Ginger Make Apple Pie, replacing half of the apples with pears and using ground ginger instead of cinnamon. Cut the top crust into decorative shapes; arrange on top of the filling. Brush with a beaten egg and sprinkle with coarse sugar.

8. Apple-Fig Combine 1 1/2 pounds sliced peeled apples, 1/2 pound each dried apples and figs, 1/8 cup sugar, 2 tablespoons lemon juice and 1/2 teaspoon cinnamon in a food processor; finely chop. Don't cook the filling. Assemble as for Apple Pie, dotting with 2 extra tablespoons butter. Bake 50 minutes.

9. Salted Caramel Apple Toss 3 pounds sliced peeled apples with 2 tablespoons lemon juice. Cook 2/3 cup sugar over medium-high heat until amber, about 10 minutes. Off the heat, stir in 1/2 stick butter and 1 tablespoon cream. Add the apples and cook until soft. Stir in 2 tablespoons flour; let cool, then add 1/2 teaspoon sea salt. Assemble and bake as for Apple Pie.

10. Hazelnut-Apple Crumble Make Apple Pie, using chopped McIntosh and Cortland apples. Omit the top crust. Mix 1/2 cup flour, 1 cup oats, 3/4 cup each brown sugar and chopped hazelnuts, 6 tablespoons melted butter and a pinch of salt. Drop in clumps over the filling.

11. Pear-Cranberry Make Apple Pie, replacing the apples with pears and the lemon juice with orange juice. Cook the pears with 1/2 cup cranberries; stir in 2 extra tablespoons flour and orange zest instead of cinnamon.

12. Pear-Chocolate Make Apple Pie, replacing the apples with pears. Add 1/3 cup chocolate chips to the cooled filling. Sprinkle the top crust with sliced almonds.

13. Pumpkin Pie 

1 disk dough for Cream Cheese Crust
All-purpose flour, for dusting
1 15-ounce can pure pumpkin
1 cup evaporated milk
2/3 cup sugar
2 large eggs
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon
1/2 teaspoon ground ginger
1/4 teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg

Roll out the dough into a 12-inch round on a lightly floured surface. Ease into a 9-inch pie plate; fold the overhang under itself and crimp. Chill 30 minutes. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F.

Prick the bottom of the crust with a fork. Line with foil, fill with dried beans and bake until the edges are golden, about 20 minutes. Remove the beans and foil and bake 10 more minutes. Cool on a rack.

Whisk the pumpkin, evaporated milk, sugar, eggs and spices in a bowl; pour into the crust. Bake until the center is just barely set, about 1 hour. (Cover the edges with foil if they brown too quickly.) Cool on a rack.

Yield: one 9-inch pie

14. Pumpkin-Orange Make Pumpkin Pie, replacing half of the sugar with honey, reducing the cinnamon to 3/4 teaspoon and adding 1 teaspoon orange zest.

15. Pumpkin-Sorghum Make Pumpkin Pie, replacing the sugar with 1/2 cup sorghum molasses and replacing the cinnamon and ginger with 3/4 teaspoon ground allspice.

16. Pumpkin Streusel Mix 2/3 cup flour, 1/2 cup brown sugar, 1/2 stick melted butter and 1/4 cup chopped walnuts. Make Pumpkin Pie; sprinkle with the streusel mixture after 20 minutes of baking. Bake until set.

17. Pumpkin-Ricotta Make Pumpkin Pie, replacing the evaporated milk with ricotta cheese and omitting the ginger.

18. Pumpkin Brulee Make Pumpkin Pie; cool. Just before serving, sprinkle generously with sugar and caramelize with a torch.


Antonis Achilleos

19. Pumpkin-Sesame Make Pumpkin Pie; cool. Cook 1/2 cup sugar and 1 tablespoon water over medium-high heat until amber, 7 minutes. Stir in 1 1/2 tablespoons toasted sesame seeds and 1/8 teaspoon salt. Thinly spread on greased foil; cool and break apart. Sprinkle on the pie just before serving.

20. Pumpkin Meringue Make Pumpkin Pie; cool. Beat 4 egg whites, 1 teaspoon cream of tartar and 2 cups confectioners' sugar in a heatproof bowl over simmering water with a mixer until the sugar dissolves. Remove from the heat and beat until stiff. Spread on the pie, and broil or torch until golden brown.
21. Pumpkin Mousse Bake the crust for Pumpkin Pie. Heat the pumpkin and evaporated milk over medium heat. Whisk the sugar, eggs, spices and 3 tablespoons cornstarch in a bowl; whisk into the pumpkin mixture and boil, whisking, until thick. Cool slightly, then pour into the crust, cover and chill overnight. Top with whipped cream.

22. Spiced Sweet Potato Make Pumpkin Pie, replacing the pumpkin with 2 cups canned sweet potato puree and using 3/4 cup sugar. Stir in 3/4 teaspoon five-spice powder. To serve, top with whipped cream and chopped crystallized ginger.

Antonis Achilleos

23. Sweet Potato–Marshmallow Make Pumpkin Pie, replacing the pumpkin with 2 cups canned sweet potato puree. Top with 1 cup mini marshmallows and broil or torch until golden brown.

Antonis Achilleos

24. Pumpkin-Cheesecake Swirl Make Pumpkin Pie filling with 3/4 cup pumpkin, 1/4 cup evaporated milk, 1 egg and half of the sugar and spices. Separately, combine 12 ounces softened cream cheese, 1/3 cup each sour cream and sugar, and 2 eggs; stir one-third into the pumpkin filling. Pour the pumpkin filling into the crust, then top with the remaining cream cheese mixture; swirl with a toothpick. Bake 50 minutes.

Antonis Achilleos

25. Sweet Potato–Bacon Make Pumpkin Pie, replacing the pumpkin with 2 cups canned sweet potato puree and using 3/4 cup sugar; add 2 tablespoons bourbon. Toss 3 strips roughly chopped bacon with 1 teaspoon sugar and cook until crisp; sprinkle on the pie just before serving.



26. Pecan Pie

1 disk dough for Basic Crust
All-purpose flour, for dusting
6 tablespoons butter, melted
2 large eggs
3/4 cup packed light brown sugar
3/4 cup light corn syrup
1 teaspoon fresh lemon juice
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
1/4 teaspoon salt
2 1/4 cups pecan halves, toasted

Roll out the dough into a 12-inch round on a lightly floured surface. Ease into a 9-inch pie plate; fold the overhang under itself and crimp. Chill 30 minutes.

Place a baking sheet on the lowest oven rack and preheat to 425 degrees F for 30 minutes. Meanwhile, make the filling: Whisk all of the remaining ingredients except the pecans in a bowl.

Spread the pecans in the crust and pour in the filling. Place the pie on the hot baking sheet and lower the oven temperature to 325 degrees F. Bake until the crust is golden and the filling is set, 45 to 55 minutes. (Cover the edges with foil if they brown too quickly.) Cool on a rack.

Yield: one 9-inch pie

27. Chocolate-Pecan Make Pecan Pie, adding 1/2 cup chopped bittersweet chocolate to the filling.

28. Date-Pecan Make Pecan Pie with only 1/2 cup corn syrup; add 2/3 cup chopped dates to the filling and chop the pecans.


Antonis Achilleos

29. Butter-Scotch-Pecan Cook 6 tablespoons butter until brown; cool. Make Pecan Pie, replacing the melted butter with the brown butter; omit the lemon juice and add 1/4 cup cream, 2 tablespoons scotch and 1 tablespoon flour to the filling.
SPREAD_FOUR_028.tif
Antonis Achilleos

30. Coconut-Macadamia Prepare the crust for Pecan Pie. Whisk 1/2 stick melted butter, 3/4 cup cream of coconut, 2 eggs, 1/3 cup brown sugar, 1 teaspoon lemon juice, 2 teaspoons vanilla and 1/4 teaspoon salt. Stir in 2 cups chopped macadamia nuts, 1/2 cup unsweetened flaked coconut and 2 tablespoons flour. Pour into the crust and bake as for Pecan Pie.
31. Maple-Walnut Make Pecan Pie, replacing the pecans with chopped toasted walnuts and the corn syrup with maple syrup. Add 1 extra egg, 1 tablespoon flour, 1 teaspoon lemon zest and 1/2 teaspoon maple extract to the filling.

32. Peanut-Chocolate-Raisin Make Pecan Pie, replacing the pecans with 2 cups dry-roasted salted peanuts; omit the lemon juice and salt. Add 1/3 cup each chocolate chips and raisins to the filling.


Antonis Achilleos

33. Pine Nut–Anise Make Pecan Pie, replacing the pecans with 2 cups pine nuts. Use only 1/2 cup corn syrup; add 1/2 teaspoon crushed anise seeds to the filling.

34. Honey-Pistachio Make Pecan Pie, replacing the pecans with chopped toasted pistachios and the corn syrup with honey. Add 1 extra egg, 1 extra teaspoon lemon juice, 1 tablespoon flour and 1/2 teaspoon ground cardamom to the filling.


Antonis Achilleos

35. Lemon-Hazelnut Bring 1 cup water and 1/2 cup sugar to a boil. Add 1 thinly sliced lemon and cook 10 minutes; let cool. Make Pecan Pie, replacing the pecans with chopped toasted hazelnuts; replace 1/4 cup of the corn syrup with 1/4 cup of the lemon syrup and add 1 tablespoon flour to the filling. Gently press the lemon slices onto the filling before baking.

36. Walnut-Carrot Make Pecan Pie, replacing the pecans with chopped toasted walnuts. Use only 1/2 cup brown sugar and add 3 medium shredded carrots, 1/3 cup currants, 1 tablespoon flour, 1/4 cup cream, 1/2 teaspoon lemon zest and 1/4 teaspoon cinnamon to the filling.

37. Chocolate Pie 

2 cups milk
1/2 cup sugar
1/4 cup cornstarch
1/2 teaspoon salt
4 large egg yolks
2 tablespoons brewed coffee, cooled
1/2 teaspoon vanilla extract
4 ounces semisweet chocolate, chopped
1 Chocolate Crumb Crust
Whipped cream and shaved chocolate, for topping

Heat the milk in a large saucepan until hot but not boiling. Whisk the sugar, cornstarch and salt in a large bowl, then whisk in the egg yolks, coffee and vanilla. Whisk half of the hot milk into the egg mixture until smooth, then gradually whisk the egg mixture into the pan with the remaining milk. Cook over medium heat, whisking constantly, until the mixture boils and thickens, 3 to 5 minutes. Remove from the heat and whisk in the chocolate until melted. Transfer to a bowl and cool slightly, stirring a few times to prevent a skin from forming.

Pour the filling into the crust; press plastic wrap directly onto the surface and chill until set, at least 4 hours. Top with whipped cream and shaved chocolate.

Yield: one 9-inch pie


Antonis Achilleos

38. Chocolate-Raspberry Make Chocolate Pie, replacing the coffee with raspberry liqueur. Serve topped with raspberries and dusted with confectioners' sugar.

39. Chocolate-Hazelnut Make Chocolate Pie with only 1/4 cup sugar; omit the coffee and replace the semisweet chocolate with bittersweet. Whisk 3/4 cup chocolate-hazelnut spread into the hot filling. Serve topped with crushed hazelnuts.

40. Chocolate–Peanut Butter Make Chocolate Pie; beat 1 cup peanut butter with 1/3 cup confectioners' sugar and spread in the crust before adding the chocolate filling. Serve topped with chopped peanuts.
41. Chocolate-Mint Make Chocolate Pie, dividing the filling in half before adding the chocolate. Add 1/4 teaspoon peppermint extract to one half; add the chocolate and 1 tablespoon cocoa powder to the other half. Pour the mint filling into the crust, then the chocolate filling. Serve topped with whipped cream and crushed peppermints.

42. Mudslide Make Chocolate Pie, replacing the coffee with 1/4 cup coffee liqueur. Serve topped with 3/4 cup cream whipped with 2 tablespoons Irish cream liqueur.


Antonis Achilleos

43. Milk Chocolate-Banana Make Chocolate Pie, replacing the semisweet chocolate with milk chocolate. Reduce the sugar to 1/3 cup and add 1 tablespoon cocoa powder with the sugar. Layer 2 sliced bananas in the crust, then add the filling. Serve topped with chocolate sprinkles.

Antonis Achilleos

44. White Chocolate-Rum Make Chocolate Pie with only 1/3 cup sugar; replace the coffee with dark rum and the semisweet chocolate with white chocolate. Serve topped with whipped cream and diced mango.

45. Chocolate Mousse Make Chocolate Pie, replacing the semisweet chocolate with 5 ounces bittersweet chocolate. Let the filling cool, then fold in 3/4 cup whipped cream.

46. Mexican Chocolate Make Chocolate Pie, adding 1 tablespoon cocoa powder, 1/2 teaspoon roasted cinnamon (or regular cinnamon), 1/4 teaspoon almond extract and 1 large pinch cayenne pepper with the sugar. Serve topped with toasted sliced almonds.

47. Chocolate-Pretzel Make Chocolate Pie; for the crust, use 1 cup ground chocolate cookies, 1 cup finely chopped pretzels and 1 extra tablespoon melted butter. Serve topped with chopped pretzels.


Antonis Achilleos

48. Mochaccino Make Chocolate Pie, replacing the coffee with 1/4 cup brewed espresso.

Antonis Achilleos

49. S'more Make a Crumb Crust with graham crackers (see first page); bake and cool, then brush with 4 ounces melted bittersweet chocolate and chill. Make half of the Chocolate Pie filling; spread in the crust and chill. Beat 3 egg whites, 1 teaspoon cream of tartar and 1 1/4 cups confectioners' sugar in a heatproof bowl over simmering water with a mixer until the sugar dissolves. Remove from the heat and beat until stiff. Spread on the pie and broil or torch until golden.

50. Brownie Whisk 1/2 cup sugar, 1/4 cup flour and 1/2 teaspoon salt in a bowl. Whisk in 4 egg yolks, 2 tablespoons cooled coffee, 6 tablespoons melted butter, 1/2 teaspoon vanilla and 4 ounces melted bittersweet chocolate. Pour into a Crumb Crust (see first page) and bake at 350 degrees F, 20 to 24 minutes.

Photographs by Antonis Achilleos